but I noticed something strange while
booking my Asian getaway my plane seems
to be making a detour over Alaska
where's my plane going out of its way to
avoid the Pacific Ocean is this a
mistake did I accidentally sign up for
the caribou route at first you might
think this was a safety issue the
Pacific is the largest and deepest of
the world's oceans if a plane encounters
a problem over a seemingly endless and
bottomless pond of water the pilots are
going to have a rough time finding a
safe spot to set her down
Alaska might not be overpopulated with
international airports but it's a lot
better than the middle of the ocean
how's that for a tourism slogan Alaska
at least it's better than sinking okay I
apologize Alaska guessing that it was a
safety precaution wouldn't be entirely
wrong when planning a route many pilots
prefer to maximize the number of
airports along their path emergencies
are incredibly rare relative to how many
planes take to the skies every day but I
can't think of many things more
stressful than losing an engine 30,000
feet over the middle of the Pacific
Ocean
that said it isn't the main reason
airlines tend to avoid making a straight
shot east to west ultimately it comes
down to saving fuel and tie it's easy to
forget that an airline is a business a
business whose profits depend on how
quickly and cheaply it can move
passengers between destinations people
also prefer to get to their next stop as
quickly as possible so it's a win-win
for both Airlines and passengers
long story short which is not my forte
speed is usually the primary factor in
determining a plane's flight path
excluding special circumstances such as
passing through the jet streams or other
meteorological concerns the fastest
route is almost always the one closest
to a straight line but wait just look at
that flight path it's anything but a
straight line well yeah when you look at
it on a flat map but our planet isn't
flat now is it it can be confusing since
we're used to looking at our world on a
two-dimensional plane unless you bust
out a globe each time you need to check
where some city or country is located
you
probably look at a world map so on a 2d
map making a giant rainbow to avoid the
Pacific Ocean looks like a much longer
route but since the earth is a sphere
yeah more or less but more on that later
a straight line is going to look very
different in three-dimensional spaces
okay let's do a little experiment got a
globe nearby oh yeah I just said most of
us use Google Maps all right here I'll
show you on mine I put one end of a
string on Los Angeles and the other end
on Tokyo when I pull it tight you'll
notice that the string isn't running
exactly parallel to the lines of
latitude printed on the globe instead
it'll Bend slightly upwards as it
follows the curvature of this mini earth
I got at the bookstore down the road
this effect is even more pronounced in
practice because my globe isn't a
perfect recreation of the real deal
in fact the problem is that it's too
perfect you see unlike a globe the earth
isn't a perfect sphere our planet is
slightly bigger around the middle kind
of like me after the holidays way who
wrote that
hmm when looking at pictures taken from
outer space the difference isn't enough
to notice the planet is so big that it's
easy to lose track of a few hundred
miles here and there but check it out if
you could take a giant string and
measure the Earth's circumference
through the poles you need 24,000 860
miles of string but if you do the same
at the equator it would jump to 24,900
miles why is that you ask
well it's because our planet rotates on
its axis ever spin yourself really fast
on the playground merry-go-round when
you were a kid remember feeling like the
thing was going to throw you out to the
sides
actually I remember I was throwing up a
lot not a good ride for me anyway
something similar happens to the Earth's
midsection as it spins the force causes
it to bulge out yes it's spinning fast
enough to do that anybody tuning in from
the equator right now you're currently
moving about a thousand miles per hour
that forty mile difference in the earth
width might not seem like very much but
when it comes to the surface area of an
ant
our planet that little bit of added
girth can go a long way the combination
of these two factors the curvature of
the earth and its extra equatorial width
ooh I like that mean that curving toward
the poles is a shorter distance than
flying what seems like on a map straight
across none of this is to say that
planes never cross the Pacific Ocean
people have to get to Australia somehow
I guess I'm not so much into giant
insects and spiders but hey to each his
own
just kidding Australia anyway planes
will also venture over open water to
avoid storms while aircraft can out
climb some types of severe weather such
as hurricanes and tropical storms
seemingly mundane thunderstorms are
surprisingly challenging with clouds
reaching altitudes of over 60,000 feet
airplanes are advised to steer around
instead of into or over them it's almost
unheard of for modern aircraft to be
brought down by severe weather but bad
enough turbulence can cause injuries to
passengers and crew if they and all the
stuff they packed with them get tossed
around the cabin the takeaway here is
keep your seatbelts fastened at all
times
another reason planes will sometimes
brave an oceanic voyage is to take
advantage of the smoother ride even in
clear weather there's much less
turbulence over water than over land
this is because the primary source of
turbulence is hot air rising up from the
ground hey there's a lot of hot air
rising up from this microphone water
distributes heat a lot better than soil
so flights over the ocean are often much
smoother the other primary consideration
for determining flight paths are air
currents namely the jet streams these
high-altitude air currents exist near
the top of the troposphere
that's the lowest layer of the Earth's
atmosphere and the one where most
weather occurs the border between the
troposphere and the next layer up the
stratosphere is known as the Trop of
pause it's altitude fluctuates between 4
and 12 miles above the Earth's surface
this fluctuation results in rapid shifts
in air temperature and pressure which
creates a wind tunnel that can reach
speeds of over 200
miles per hour these extreme speeds are
most common in winter when the
temperature difference is greatest but
regular wind speeds of 80 to 140 miles
per hour
are nothing to scoff at so keep your
scoffing to yourself there are four main
jet streams - in each hemisphere and
thanks to the Earth's rotation they
mostly flow west to east the two most
important for air travel are the polar
jet stream which forms near the Arctic
Circle and the subtropical jet stream
near the equator both are thousands of
miles long despite being only a few
miles wide flying with a jet stream can
shave several hours off of a trip but
flying into it and slow the plane down
considerably it's also worth noting the
risks associated with jet streams the
biggest hazard is a kind of turbulence
known as clear air turbulence which
occurs along the edges of the streams
this kind of turbulence is nearly
impossible to predict and far more
intense than the usual variety
turbulence related accidents are rare
but they are possible when particular
serious incident happened in 1997 when a
plane flying from Tokyo to Honolulu
suddenly dropped after hitting a patch
of clear air turbulence the pilots were
able to regain control but many
passengers had been thrown from their
seats really hard by the sudden descent
with that danger in mind flight plans
need to be carefully calculated to take
advantage of the jet streams without
putting the plane at risk
repeat after me keep your seatbelts on
at all times while flying understanding
why planes take the routes they do often
comes down to facts that we don't
usually think about in everyday life
the jet stream mostly affects things
tens of thousands of feet in the air and
the curvature of the earth doesn't
really matter unless you're traveling
hundreds of miles per hour over vast
distances I don't know about you but my
car can't quite manage either of those
things at least not yet
I have a few ideas but we'll save that
for a video titled seven things you
shouldn't strap rockets to